Seekable OCI (SOCI) represents the modern solution to this problem. It allows the container runtime to start the application without downloading the entire image. Instead, it "lazy loads" only the file chunks required for the application to start.
Mechanism: SOCI creates an index of the image (stored alongside it in ECR). When a pod is scheduled, the SOCI snapshotter in containerd mounts a user-space FUSE filesystem. The application starts immediately. When it tries to import torch, the FUSE filesystem fetches the specific blocks of the library from the registry on demand.
Benchmark Reality: Benchmarks consistently show a reduction in startup latency for large ML images by over 50%. A node can transition from "Provisioned" to "Ready" and start running the user's code almost immediately, rather than sitting in ContainerCreating status for minutes.
Hybrid Optimization (SOCI + NVMe): While lazy loading improves startup, fetching data over the network during training (e.g., loading the next batch of data libraries) can slow down execution. The "High-Performance" architecture utilizes the Karpenter-provisioned NVMe RAID0 volume as the local caching layer for the SOCI snapshotter. This ensures that once a chunk is fetched, it is cached on high-speed NVMe, mitigating the FUSE overhead for subsequent accesses.
4.1.3 Alternative: kube-fledged
For scenarios involving "lab" environments where a specific set of images is used by hundreds of students or researchers simultaneously, kube-fledged offers an alternative. It creates a cache of container images on the worker nodes. However, for a dynamic Karpenter cluster where nodes are ephemeral, SOCI is superior as it does not rely on "warming" nodes that might be deleted an hour later.
Decision: Implement SOCI as the default strategy for the platform to support diverse user environments, backed by NVMe caching to sustain training throughput.
5. Failure Handling and Reliability
In a "Compute-as-a-Service" environment, the platform must distinguish between "Platform Failures" (Spot preemption, network partitions) and "User Failures" (code bugs). The goal is to make Platform Failures transparent and recoverable.
5.1 SkyPilot Checkpointing
SkyPilot provides the orchestration layer for recovery, but the application logic must cooperate.
   * The "High-Performance" Practice: Utilize SkyPilot's MOUNT_CACHED mode for checkpoint buckets.
   * Mechanism: Standard S3 mounts (MOUNT) write synchronously to the object store, which is slow and blocks the training loop. MOUNT_CACHED mounts the S3 bucket but uses the local disk (again, leveraging that NVMe RAID0 volume) as a write-through cache.
   * Benefit: The training loop writes the checkpoint to local NVMe at gigabytes per second and immediately resumes training. A background process asynchronously uploads the data to S3. This reduces the "checkpoint tax"—the time GPUs sit idle—by nearly 10x compared to direct S3 writes.
5.2 Karpenter Interruption Handling
Karpenter has native interruption handling that listens to an SQS queue for AWS Health events and Spot Interruption Warnings.
The Signal Propagation Chain:
   1. Trigger: AWS emits a Spot Interruption Warning (2 minutes before reclamation).
   2. Karpenter Action: Karpenter consumes this event from SQS and immediately cordons and drains the node.
   3. Kubernetes Action: The API server sends a SIGTERM signal to the Pods running on the node.
   4. The Critical Gap: Many ML scripts (especially Python based) ignore SIGTERM by default. They simply continue running until the hard kill (SIGKILL) occurs 2 minutes later, resulting in lost progress.
The High-Performance Fix: The platform must enforce or provide a wrapper that handles SIGTERM. The user code must register a signal handler. Upon receipt of SIGTERM, this handler should trigger an immediate "emergency checkpoint" and exit with a specific error code that SkyPilot recognizes as a "preemption" rather than a "crash."
import signal
import sys

def graceful_exit(signum, frame):
   print("Caught SIGTERM from Karpenter/NTH. Saving emergency checkpoint...")
   save_checkpoint()
   # Exit with a code SkyPilot or the job wrapper can identify as a retry-able event
   sys.exit(0) 

signal.signal(signal.SIGTERM, graceful_exit)

When this mechanism is in place, SkyPilot detects the node termination and automatically reschedules the task on a new node (potentially in a different Availability Zone or Region), resuming seamlessley from the emergency checkpoint.
6. Ranked List of Architectural Decisions
The following matrix ranks the architectural decisions by their impact on Researcher Experience (RX) and Performance.
Rank
	Domain
	The "Easy Way" (Baseline)
	The "High-Performance Way" (Recommended)
	Impact on RX
	1
	Data & Storage
	Mountpoint for S3: Easy setup, free, limited POSIX.
	FSx for Lustre + NVMe: Full POSIX, 1200 Gbps throughput, local caching.
	Critical: Enables training on massive datasets without I/O bottlenecks; prevents job crashes due to file system incompatibilities.
	2
	Networking
	Standard VPC CNI: Good for inference/single-node.
	EFA + Kyverno Injection: Essential for multi-node distributed training (NCCL).
	High: Reduces "bubble time" in distributed training; prevents silent performance degradation.
	3
	Image Vending
	Standard Pull: Simple, high latency (5-10m+).
	SOCI Snapshotter: Lazy loading, near-instant start.
	High: Makes the platform feel "interactive" and responsive; allows faster iteration loops.
	4
	Observability
	CloudWatch Container Insights: Generic pod names.
	Fluent Bit + SkyPilot Tagging: Logs organized by Task ID and User.
	Medium: Drastically reduces "Mean Time To Debug" for researchers finding their logs.
	5
	Storage Config
	EBS Volumes: Persistent, slower, costly at scale.
	Automated NVMe RAID0: Karpenter userData formats local scratch.
	Medium: Provides "free" high-speed scratch space for datasets/checkpoints.
	6
	Reliability
	Retry on Failure: Blind restart.
	Signal Handling + MOUNT_CACHED: Graceful save & async upload.
	Medium: Prevents lost compute hours by saving state immediately before preemption.
	Conclusion
Building a "Compute-as-a-Service" platform with SkyPilot and Karpenter on EKS offers a powerful foundation, but default configurations favor operational simplicity over researcher experience. To maximize RX, the architecture must actively combat the inherent latencies of cloud infrastructure.
The evidence unequivocally supports an architecture anchored by FSx for Lustre for storage, EFA for networking, and SOCI for image distribution. While these choices introduce setup complexity—requiring custom EC2NodeClass user data, Kyverno policies, and specialized CSI drivers—they fundamentally alter the user experience. They transform a platform where researchers wait for images to pull and data to copy, into one where compute is nearly instantaneous and storage is transparently performant. By implementing the "High-Performance Way" patterns detailed above, the platform evolves from a simple job scheduler into a true high-performance research accelerator.
Works cited